Introduction
============

PerfExplorer is a framework for parallel performance data mining and
knowledge discovery. The framework architecture enables the development
and integration of data mining operations that will be applied to
large-scale parallel performance profiles.

The overall goal of the PerfExplorer project is to create a software to
integrate sophisticated data mining techniques in the analysis of
large-scale parallel performance data.

PerfExplorer supports clustering, summarization, association,
regression, and correlation. Cluster analysis is the process of
organizing data points into logically similar groupings, called
clusters. Summarization is the process of describing the similarities
within, and dissimilarities between, the discovered clusters.
Association is the process of finding relationships in the data. One
such method of association is regression analysis, the process of
finding independent and dependent correlated variables in the data. In
addition, comparative analysis extends these operations to compare
results from different experiments, for instance, as part of a
parametric study.

In addition to the data mining operations available, the user may
optionally choose to perform comparative analysis. The types of charts
available include time-steps per second, relative efficiency and speedup
of the entire application, relative efficiency and speedup of one event,
relative efficiency and speedup for all events, relative efficiency and
speedup for all phases and runtime breakdown of the application by event
or by phase. In addition, when the events are grouped together, such as
in the case of communication routines, yet another chart shows the
percentage of total runtime spent in that group of events. These
analyses can be conducted across different combinations of parallel
profiles and across phases within an execution.
