Installation and Configuration
==============================

PerfExplorer uses TAUdb and PerfDMF databases so if you have not already
you will need to install TAUdb, see ?. To configure PerfExplorer move to
the ``tools/src/PerfExplorer/`` directory in you TAU distribution. Type:

::

     %>./configure

If you haven't already done so for other TAU tools, add
``[path to tau]/tau2/apple/bin`` to your path.

The following command-line options are available to configure:

Available configuration options
===============================

-  ``-engine=<analysis engine>``

   Specifies the data-mining engine to use. The supported options
   include weka and R.

-  ``-rroot=<directory>``

   Specifies the directory where R is installed. Specifically, it should
   be the directory where the ``bin``, ``include``, ``lib``, ``library``
   and ``share`` directories are located.

-  ``-objectport=<available network
               port>``

   Specifies the port that the PerfExplorer server should use, when
   running PerfExplorer in client-server mode. Select an available
   network port, and make sure that other appropriate network
   configurations are made (firewalls, etc.). The default port is 9999.

-  ``-registryport=<available network
               port>``

   Specifies the port that the rmiregistry should use, when ruining
   PerfExplorer in client-server mode. Select an available network port,
   and make sure that other appropriate network configurations are made
   (firewalls, etc.). The default port is 1099.

-  ``-server=<server name>``

   Specifies the fully qualified domain name of the server where
   PerfExplorer is run, when running PerfExplorer in client-server mode.
